docs: Recursive types (#4715)
dfinity/motoko: doc/md/writing-motoko/recursive-types.md

---
sidebar_position: 29
---

# Recursive types

## Overview

> A recursive type is a type that contains the values of the same type. Recursive types enable you to create complex recursive data structures, such as linked lists or trees.

Reviewer: Or of a type derived from it, like
``` Motoko
type Inception<T> = { #deeper : Inception<Inception<T>>; #level : Inception<T>; #shallower : T }
```
But this is currently disallowed ("is expansive") bu `moc`, so maybe my this comment is just moot :-(

> Motoko supports linked lists, one data structure that implements recursive types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Motoko supports linked lists, a data structure that is an example of a recursive type.
```

## Recursive lists

``` motoko no-repl
type List<T> = ?(T, List<T>);
```

In this example, the generic type `List<T>` is defined with one type parameter. `List<T>` is a tuple with two components: the first component is the type parameter `T` , and the second component is `List<T>`. The second component is the recursive type, as the generic type `List<T>` contains a value of itself within its own definition.

`List` is a repeating pattern, where each repeated component is a tuple that contains a value of type `T` and a reference to the tail of `List<T>`.

## Recursive functions

A recursive function can be used to retrieve the last element of a given list:

```motoko no-repl
func last<T>(l : List<T>) : ?T {
  switch l {
    case null { null };
    case (?(x, null)) { ?x };
    case (?(_, t)) { last<T>(t) };
  };
};
```

> This generic function `last<T>` takes one argument `l` of type `List<T>`, which refers to the head of a list. If this function returns the last element of a list, it returns an optional value `?T`. If there isn't a last element, it will return `null`. The body of the function uses a `switch` statement to determine if the list passed as an argument is a null list, the last element of a list, or if it is the tail of a list with a next value.

Reviewer: "is a null list" -> "is an empty list"

In this switch statement, the `last<T>` function is used recursively, since it is called within itself with `t` as the argument. The function is called again each time the case statement is satisfied, and the function receives a list head that it can switch on until the last element is returned.

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add a note that one needs recursive functions to reach/access all data in a recursive type.
